All right. Good afternoon. Good
afternoon.
My name's Nathan Jones. It's a pleasure
to be here with y'all.
It really has been a great conference so
far, right?
What What's been y'all's favorite part?
I wasn't fishing.
Uh no, come on. What's What's been a
What's What's a great memory you've made
so far?
Lunch.
Yeah, tasty food, huh?
Helen's done a really great job of
sourcing really tasty local food. What
else?
Low power consumption. Yeah, Joey's talk
yesterday? Yeah, yeah, there were a lot
of great optimizations in there,
definitely.
What else?
Dem- Yes, so many cool projects. So many
cool projects.
New people, absolutely.
Yeah.
Same, same. I met someone
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I met someone
yesterday gave me this cool NFC tag. Now
I'm I'm really excited to play with NFC
stuff, which is cool.
Um yeah, yeah, it's been It's been
great. It's my It's I'm really excited
and more than a little bit nervous to be
bringing you this talk here, uh but
hopefully uh by the end uh I can I can
start to convince you to replace
these pieces of software
with this extraordinary piece of
software.
Um
and uh yeah, so uh anytime we want to do
more than one thing on a
microcontroller, we have to figure out
how to sort of manage multiple tasks at
the same time.
And um
with the prevalence of of these uh sort
of commercial-level
uh real-time operating systems on the
left, you would think that those are
sort of the fait accompli, that those
those are what we reach for when we when
we need to multitask.
And and the the little super loop kind
of gets shoved to the side.
Um but I want to build the case to you
that uh the super loop has a much bigger
place potentially in our multitasking,
that there's a lot that we give up
uh when we move to uh preemptive RTOSes,
okay? So, what I want to do today is is
set the stage a little bit, talk about
why we care about schedulers, what what
services they give us,
and then the two main sections in the
middle here we're going to talk about
what sorts of things we give up when we
decide to use a a real-time operating
system, a preemptive real-time operating
system, and and hopefully I'll I'll
sufficiently scare you that those are
awful um unless we really need them. And
And then we'll talk about the actual
response time. What are What are the
metrics by which we can evaluate these
operating systems, and I'll hopefully
share with you or show you that uh the
the super loop with a little
modification uh can absolutely perform
as well or in some cases even better
than a preemptive real-time operating
system. Uh and then we'll conclude.
Okay. So,
to set the stage, all of our devices do
things. These are their tasks. Uh very
frequently they are skewed up by us by
some events, a user pressing a button,
or a a motor hitting a sensor.
Um
some of them may be uh triggered by some
sort of timer, and when these events
when these triggers happen, the tasks
are supposed to complete something.
They're supposed to run and execute uh
some series of commands. And uh so, in
the case of a toy, maybe when when my
4-year-old presses a button, then the
little cash register's supposed to show
me a price. Or uh if I'm in an
industrial setting, when a sensor is
reached, I need a motor to shut off for
safety purposes.
Um all of these tasks have deadlines,
meaning there's a point in time after
the task has been set up
that if it does not complete, bad things
happen. And what bad things are can vary
from system to system. In my toy on the
left, if it takes a half a second or a
second or 5 seconds for that price to
show up on the display, the user
experience suffers. The system feels
laggy, and it just doesn't work as well.
On the right, if it takes more than 5 or
10 milliseconds from my motor to stop,
then there's a a potential for some real
collateral damage to not just the
system, but also the operator.
So, in the first case, we might say
that's kind of a soft deadline. It's
It's We want the price to be displayed
within a few hundred milliseconds, but
if it's a little late, it's not the end
of the world, but it's still somewhat of
a soft deadline.
On the right-hand side, we would say
that's more of a hard deadline.
There are There are safety criteria that
I have to meet uh
in order for this product to even be
shipped. And And so, that deadline
absolutely has to be met, otherwise the
system doesn't work.
And this, in effect, is what the
scheduler gives us. I might have many,
many tasks in the system. In the sort of
worst-case scenario, they are all ready
to go right at the exact same time. This
is called the critical instant, all
right? So, in sort of a worst-case
scenario where, you know, the timer
triggers, the user mashes the button,
the this the the motor hits the sensor,
everything's ready to go all at once.
It's the job of the scheduler to figure
out which task runs first, after that,
next, and and third, all right? Um so,
they are invoked by the scheduler. They
all have to complete
um by their deadline. Now Now, a
simplification,
um which in many cases works out, is
that the tasks uh their deadline, the
the time when they have to be complete,
is simply the before the next time the
task might run.
Uh in the event of a a task that's
triggered by a timer, then the task just
has to complete once per period.
But even for event-driven tasks, what we
call sporadic tasks that aren't
necessarily timer-driven,
we can, at least for the purposes of our
analysis, assume that that task is
periodic with a period of the fastest
interarrival time. So, the fastest time
I might expect these these this task to
get queued up, all right? If I'm writing
a um
a piece of my software to respond to to
keyboard presses from a user. I don't
exactly know how fast those can arrive,
but I make I can make a fair
approximation based on the fastest
typist typing at 200 words per minute or
something like that and use that as kind
of a metric. Well, okay, the fastest I
think I might expect this task to run is
once every
100 milliseconds or something like that.
Um okay, so you so the this is a timing
diagram. We'll see a couple of these
today. I've got my tasks listed on the
on the Y axis here and then time kind of
increasing to the right on my X axis.
The vertical green arrows, these mean
this task has become ready to run. It's
waiting for the scheduler to give it
access to the CPU in order to run. And
from for the most part, that task needs
to complete before the next green arrow,
otherwise our quote unquote bad things
happen. Uh in some cases, the tasks need
to complete prior to the next period and
in that case you might see a little
downward facing blue arrow to indicate
that that's actually the deadline for
that task.
So, um let's imagine a simple system
tasks A, B, and C. Here's sort of some
pseudo code that uh demonstrates how we
might set this up using a preemptive
RTOS. For most of these, what I'm going
to do is sort of create these tasks and
assign them a priority in my main loop
and then the very last thing I do more
or less is start my scheduler and
usually it doesn't return.
Inside most of my tasks, uh I've got a
an infinite loop that does what I want
that task to do and then the operating
system provides me with a whole bunch of
primitives
that I can call to kind of manipulate my
tasks to set delays,
uh to give or take semaphores, to add
things to queues or receive them from
queues.
This is the super loop or with since
it's got a little modification, I'm
going to I'm going to call it the super
duper loop.
All right, so um you can see down at the
bottom I've got my while one loop. I've
got my infinite loop. And um the the
code at the top is setting up my my
tasks variable G_tasks, which is uh uh
a large integer that has a bit position
for each of my tasks. And the bit
positions
are set when a task is ready to run. So,
other code in my system here, the timer
ISR or my button ISR, are setting the
the bits in my G_tasks variable. In my
infinite loop,
I'm checking if any of those bits are
set. If they are, I run my task. But
most importantly, I'm not just sort of
checking each of these ones each of
these tasks sequentially
from one to the next and then starting
back up to the top. You'll notice I've
got them all embedded in a a chained if
statement.
All right, and this is very important
this cuz this establishes priorities.
So, if my system is running task A,
if that that first if statement is true,
it'll run task A. It doesn't
automatically go to task B. That that
part of the if statement evaluated as
true, so the code jumps to the bottom,
which is the end of my while loop, so it
starts over at the top again.
If task B is ready to run,
but task A has also become ready to run
again, then task A runs again. So, this
this small change in feature
that establishes priorities
significantly improves the response time
of my my scheduler here. And we'll we'll
see mathematically how that happens in a
couple of slides.
But those are those are the two kind of
schedulers we're going to look at.
Couple of critical assumptions that
we're going to make which
do not do not match reality. And I'll be
honest with you, it's rather infuriating
because you're not going to design a
system that actually meets all these
criteria. But it's these are the
assumptions we have to make in order for
the math to not be crazy gross.
And and and and for the most part what
we're going to do is
by by saying we're going to use these
assumptions when we derive our math,
at a minimum this sort of helps set kind
of the bar that we're trying to shoot
when we design our scheduler.
Okay.
So, let's talk about why preemption is a
problem. And the reason
is race conditions.
All right, a couple of jokes up here for
you. Yeah.
So, it seems really nice cuz I can write
my code and just sort of not worry of
what what the rest of the system is
doing. Um but as as humans, we don't
think
uh we don't think in that way. We think
sequentially. It's I think it's why we
write really good code, but it's really
hard to think about all the ways that
our system interacts. Um
writing preemptive code is sort of like
designing a little highway system that
looks like this. 99 times out of 100,
those cars are not going to collide, but
there's no protection guaranteeing that
they won't. So, one time out of 100,
just cuz the system allows it, they're
going to bang into each other.
One of my favorite books,
uh Peopleware, and the author said, uh
most studies show that only about 1% of
the human population can multitask.
Chances are that's not you. That's just
how statistics work.
And um like we'll see in a couple of
slides, uh allowing this preemption and
trying to identify where these race
conditions are is really difficult.
Uh here's a a 1995 era example of the
difficulty of multitasking and and
making sure I don't have race conditions
in my code. Anyone play any of the Dr.
Brain games?
One, okay.
Yeah, yeah, this was this was the fun
Okay, so this is So, then this needs a
little explanation.
So,
these were uh these were Dr. Brain was
like a set of logic puzzle computer
games
uh to sort of just train train your
brain. Lumosity's basically the same
thing now, okay? This In this game here,
you had um
little colored uh balls coming out of
one port, and and you the the the child
playing the game can switch which way
the tracks go.
And so, then there'd be a color on the
receiving port, and you had to to sure
that the right colored ball got to the
port when that color showed up and so
you're managing all these these little
track switches to make sure that balls
that are coming out are rerouted or
um
directed aside before they they get to
to the end. And it's it's a lot even
just like having six balls on the screen
and like four tracks to manage is a lot.
Oops, that's going the wrong way.
Okay. So,
um
race conditions not only hard to keep
out of your code when we allow
preemption. They're really hard to debug
once they're in there. I'll give you an
example.
Actually, I'll give you three. Here's a
game for us. Let's see if we can
identify the race condition. This is a
snippet of code that's modeling a bank
transaction. We'll assume it's it's
running in a multi-threaded environment,
so I've got multiple tasks that can
preempt each other and all call this
code. There's a race condition here.
There's a problem.
Can you see it?
What's up?
All the math is division.
>> Well, is that even a
>> What's that?
>> Yes, time of check time of use. Okay, so
on almost every processor those those
increment operators are going to get uh
implemented as as read modify writes.
Right, the actual machine code might
look like I'm pulling a value out of
memory into a register. I'm operating on
that register and I'm storing it back,
all right? So, if one thread starts
executing this function,
it pulls in a value from the user's
account. It adds some value to it. It's
about to update the user's balance with
this value 350. Right at that exact
moment, a higher priority task runs,
thread A.
Thread A runs to completion. It pulls
the old value
out of memory, adds a different number
to it, and stores it back. Now, memory
has this value 275.
When the processor switches back to the
lower priority thread, that value gets
overwritten.
And I have a race condition, right? I
have a bug in this code because I
allowed preemption in my system.
Here's an example of um
trying to uh create a singleton object.
So, I want to make sure if if this thing
wasn't initialized, I create it, but if
other code tries to initialize this
thing, it just sort of skips over.
Where is the race condition here?
Yeah, absolutely. Okay, so if I got a
lower priority priority thread that's
running, it creates my object. If right
at that exact moment, it gets preempted
by a higher priority task.
That code doesn't see the fact that this
thing was initialized. It makes a second
object, returns control back to that
that first task, and now I've got two
singletons.
All right, so I'm going to fix it. I'm
going to fix it, everyone.
I'm going to make sure that there's sort
of a uh a doubly checked lock here,
right? I'm going to If it's not
initialized, then I acquire a mutex cuz
that's good software practice. As long
as it's still not initialized, then I
create the thing, and then I can release
my mutex.
There's still a race condition.
Between the the first two?
Right here?
There might be. That's not the one I was
going for.
But I'll I'll I'll answer it in live
code. What's up?
Say it again.
So, initialized can change while you're
running. Okay.
Yeah, there's there's there's a more
subtle one, too.
Oh, yeah. If I had optimized, maybe it's
not even doing the second read. Yeah,
yeah. And so and So, all these could be
true. The one I'm going to show you is
kind of along these lines. Optimizing
compilers might realize or might see
this code and think that there's no
relation between the object and the
initialized. So, it might reorder them
for the purposes of performance, at
which point I'm And this setting my flag
variable before my object's created. So
now I might have a thread that runs. It
successfully makes its way all the way
here. It's acquired the lock. It's good
to go. It sets initialized to true
before the object has been created. Now
a higher priority task runs.
It thinks the object's been initialized
because initialized was set to true. And
it's trying to operate on something that
hasn't been created yet.
All right. And the even worse, right? To
kick a person while they're down,
there's no automated tools to detect
this. None.
There are some tools that can help
detect data races, i.e. if the if you're
trying to access shared memory kind of
without protection. But overall race
conditions, none. To detect these, these
are some simple cases. If you want to
make sure your code base is race free,
you have to go through literally every
line of code,
really every line of machine code, and
ask if any of my other higher priority
tasks interrupted me at this exact point
in time, what bad things could happen?
And and you can imagine that that's
like, right? That's O N factorial
for like a 100 line code base, you're
just already outside the realm of
possibility.
Um there are ways to prevent these, of
course, cuz folks want to use preemptive
RTOSes. Um we could use some
atomic operations if we're accessing
shared data, but that just prevents data
races, not other types of race
conditions. Maybe I disable interrupts
entirely. If I can disable interrupts, I
basically
eliminate preemption in my system, uh
which to me is
basically giving up defeat. It's like
saying, "Oh yeah, you know what? This
this preemption probably should have
just been a a single threaded
application anyways." Whoops. Um we can
protect shared resources with mutexes,
but then once we have mutexes in our
system, we have to worry about deadlock,
livelock, priority inversion. And to me
that's a little like, "Don't worry about
it, I fixed it."
It's safe now. I got it.
All right. So, not only are race
conditions hard to keep out of your code
once you have allow preemption, they're
hard to find and debug once they're in
there, and any solutions you introduce
sometimes cause more problems than the
original thing you were trying to fix.
It's interesting to me that a
single-threaded system effectively would
eliminate all of this, right? A
single-threaded system would only allow
a single task to run at any time. I I I
There's no possible way for these two
cars to both be driving at the same time
on a single-threaded system and to
crash. Um and so that like categorically
kind of fixes the issue.
So, regardless if you if you if you
choose to program some super-duper loops
later on, what I hope you you walk away
with from this section is that
preemption this is uh
it's it's it's a little scary thing,
right? I'm walking around with a loaded
foot gun here. So, if I choose to use a
preemptive scheduler on my system, I
really need to know
um what I'm doing. I need to to be aware
of the fact that there's possibly hidden
race conditions in my code that I just I
can't detect.
So, I have to be really rigorous about
uh trying to make sure that that uh
those are not in there in the first
place. Um
and uh and if I don't want to deal with
all that nonsense,
uh maybe I I go back to my my
super-duper loop.
Okay. So,
RTOSs really scary? They do do some cool
stuff, though. But hopefully when we
look at the actual thing that the
scheduler is supposed to do for us and
we analyze the response time, you'll see
uh there's a lot of cases where the
super loop uh is plenty sufficient. All
right. So, let's go back to my little
timing diagram here. Um I mentioned that
these tasks they all need to run before
their deadlines,
cuz if they don't,  bad stuff
happens, all right? So, that's our
metric, right? Here's my little pseudo
code in the upper right-hand side.
If
the worst-case response time for my task
is less than all of their deadlines,
then we say my task set is schedulable,
right? The worst case response time is
the longest amount of time it might take
my system to complete executing a
specific task just under all cases,
okay? So, in this case, right? Like the
the second task here, play sound, has a
uh a worst case response time that's the
longest out of all the three cuz my
scheduler has decided to run the other
two tasks first.
So, let's look at how we might calculate
the worst case response time for a task
using a preemptive RTOS, right? So,
here's a little a sample uh task list,
ABC. They've got their priorities there.
Uh
they've got execution times in that
third column and uh the rates at which
they are all
need to run in that fourth column. And
you've got a a timing diagram at the
bottom to show you how a system a
scheduler might execute those tasks once
they were all released at that critical
instant, right? Um so, here's my
formula, which which on the uh I'll
start on the right. So, we're saying
that the the worst case response time
for some task J,
uh at a minimum, all the way on the
right-hand side, it's going to take its
own execution time, right? So, the worst
case response time of any task is, at a
minimum, its execution time plus this
term in the middle. And this term in the
middle says,
"I might have higher priority tasks that
preempt me as I'm running." All right?
So, for all tasks from zero to one lower
than me, right? So, this is essentially
saying for all higher priority tasks
than me,
I'm going to calculate the ceiling. This
is the ceiling operator, not the
bracket. The ceiling of um how often
that task um or sorry, uh
how much time I have, my worst case
response time, divided by the period of
that higher priority task.
Um I'm going to use my laser pointer
here, actually. Okay. So,
um if I if I assume that the worst-case
response task for something is 10
milliseconds,
and I've got a task higher priority task
that runs every 5 milliseconds. Well,
then that task is going to run twice.
All right, it's going to run twice in
that time when I want my lower priority
task to run. So, I have to account for
both execution times. All right, so this
term here is saying
out of all the time that it might
however long it might take me to execute
my task,
how many iterations would I expect of a
higher priority task, and then multiply
that by the higher priority task's
execution time
to figure out, you know, sort of
recursively how long it might take to
execute something. Let me give you a
little example.
So, using this this thing here, let's
see if I want to I'm going to let's say
I'm trying to find the worst-case
response time
for task C, the lowest thing in the
system. All right, we'll make the very
optimistic assumption at first that it
it executes in exactly its execution
time, so 10 10 microseconds.
So, let's say on the left here, we're
going to assume that it takes 10 10
microseconds. That's the worst-case
response time for this thing.
In that 10 microseconds,
I've got task A that runs every 5
microseconds, and task B that runs every
10 microseconds,
um that are going to add some amount of
execution time to this thing. So, this
one we'd say, "Okay, I got that first
guess wrong."
Right? It definitely takes longer than
10 microseconds to run task C because
even if it started at time zero,
while it's executing,
task A is going to run twice, task B is
going to run one more time. It's not
It's going to take longer than 10
microseconds to run this third task. So,
let me update my my my guess. Let me
guess that it's going to take that 14
microseconds to run task C.
All right? In that time, now task A
potentially runs three times,
and task B potentially runs two times.
So,
they're going to as this thing gets
longer, right, there's more
opportunities for the higher priority
tasks to kick off, so the worst case
response time sort of gets kind of worse
and worse and then hopefully it reaches
some limit. We haven't reached it yet
cuz right now this is saying if if I had
thought task C was going to finally
finish in 14 microseconds, that's still
wrong. It's at that point it's still
taking 17 microseconds. So, let me
update my guess.
Let me say let me guess that it takes 17
microseconds to run task C now.
So, I'm going to update these values
here.
Now, task A gets an additional chance to
run. So, my my new value is 18. This is
getting closer. This is getting closer.
Let's look one more time. Let's say my
final guess is 18 microseconds.
Now, finally I have a value on the left
that matches the value on the right and
this says yes, this is in fact our worst
case response time for that last task.
In the very worst case,
like you can see in this diagram here,
if all the tasks run, tasks A and B run
enough times that task C doesn't finish
until
18 microseconds later.
That's its worst case response time.
And so, for this system, right, that is
sufficient. That meets its period. So,
we'd say at least that task at that
priority level, that works out. If if
for the other two tasks in my system, A
and B,
their worst case response times are less
than those two deadlines, 5 and 10
microseconds, then my system is
schedulable. I'm good to go. All right?
Let's practice. Okay, so
we got eyes glazing over late in the
day.
I want this to make some sense. Here's a
new set of tasks, all right? ABC,
priorities 0 1 2, they've got their
execution times and their periods.
And here's my formula. I want you to try
to figure out grab some pen and paper.
Try to figure out for me is this
I got a chicken. We'll
we'll go through maybe I'll I'll I'll
we'll go through it in just a minute,
but let's see if we can take a shot at
determining if this task set is
schedulable.
It's terrifying giving this talk with
you in the audience, Dimitri. Got to
tell you that, dude.
Okay, we'll we'll work through the last
one together, actually. Cuz this this is
the important one. Okay, so for task C,
we I'm going to I'm going to start a
little less optimistic. I'm not going to
say that it just takes its own execution
time. It's pretty clear that at least
the the the first two are also going to
run, right? So, we'll start there. We'll
say we assume that task A runs once,
task B runs once, task C completes in
six whatevers.
Okay.
Um so, I'm going to assume six up here.
Um
and this is
uh three for my my task C. Okay, so then
this is going to have I'm going to have
two terms here, right? Task A runs um
once every five whatevers and has an
execution time of one. All right, so
that would be the ceiling of 6/5 would
be two.
Uh 2 * 1 is two is just two.
And for Oh, no.
Oh, it all went away.
Sad. Okay.
For task
uh
B
All right, one runs once every six
whatevers.
Uh execution time of two. So, uh the
ceiling of that is just one.
So, I've got uh two whatevers from A,
two whatevers from B, and three from C.
Three 4 5 6 7. Seven is not six. So, I
got that one wrong. I got to increase
Oh, that's my only option.
All right.
All right, so let's assume this is now
this is seven.
All right. Worst case response time
seven. For task A, this runs once every
five whatevers times one. So, this is
still two.
And for task A
7 over Oh, sorry, for task B 7/6 times
two.
Okay, the ceiling of 7/6 is now two.
I've got 2 * 2.
So, that's four.
Okay, so 3 + 4 + 2 That's That's nine.
So, I'm going up, right? My My last
guess is nine.
Forget I'm I'm trying to do this with a
mouse, you know. Okay, this is where we
This is I'll cut to the quick, right?
This is where we we find out that this
works. If we try to to to run this
system using a preemptive RTOS, task C
takes nine whatevers to complete, which
womp womp is longer than its period.
So, we would say actually that this set
is not schedulable, right? There's just
enough stuff my computer's trying to do
that it can't get to task C in time.
Okay.
Now, let's look at the super duper loop,
right? I've got my task set here. Oops.
Um
four four tasks, same setup as before,
priority, execution time, period, and uh
and I've got my little time timing
diagram here. The um the way to figure
out how long these tasks take is um very
similar, right? Cuz I'm I'm going to
have to figure out um I'm going to have
to factor in how long my task takes
uh at all,
right? So, there's that term on the on
the way on the right that is the
execution time for my task.
Um
I'm going to have to figure out how many
times higher priority tasks are going to
run before my task gets to complete.
That's this little middle term here.
Little more complex, but but very
similar.
The one The biggest downside to my my
non-preemptive schedulers, right? My
super loop, is that um there might
actually the actual true worst case
right as all of my tasks are released,
they're all ready to go,
I have actually just started running a
lower priority task that will run until
it's done. And in fact, we're going to
assume in the worst case it's the
longest lower priority task that could
possibly run in my system. Um and so, in
this case that's that's task D, and
that's this term here, right? So, um to
figure out
if if task C is schedulable, I have to
assume the longest-running lower
priority task is executing as soon as
everything starts,
then I have to tally up all the higher
priority tasks that can execute in that
time. And the only difference between
this term and and the one previously is
that up in this numerator here, instead
of this just being the worst-case
response time for the task, it's the
worst-case response time minus its
execution time. Cuz as soon as this task
starts running, it can't be preempted,
right? Previously for the for the
preemptive R tasks, I had to account for
higher priority tasks potentially
getting released all the way until my
task completed.
But in this case, once I can
successfully start task C running, it
won't get preempted, so it's only up
until this point here that I have to
worry about uh my higher priority tasks
running multiple times.
So, um so then this is this is my
formula for figuring out whether a task
set is schedulable for a super duper
loop.
All right.
So,
we'll try we'll try one more for this
one.
Um and again, I'll give you a couple
minutes just to kind of think it through
or take notes or take a nap if you want.
And um and then I'll I'll I'll cut to
the after a minute or so, we'll show you
that last one there. Cuz again, that's
kind of the key one.
That's right. I have not accounted for
context switching.
>> All right, so Charles and Demetri have
already done this in their heads at this
point. For the rest of us, I'm going to
share with you
it it works out, believe it or not. This
that was the same task set that we were
looking at
a a minute ago when we were looking at a
preemptive RTOS. It didn't work. If I'd
have tried to schedule that task set
using ThreadX or using free RTOS, I I
would have I would have found delay like
delays my system. Like task C would have
would have got pushed, it would not have
met its deadline. If I'm using the super
loop, holy poop, folks, it works. And
it's it's not an accident. I mean,
although it's a function of the fact
that uh right when uh task B wants to to
run here or or sorry, task C um the RTOS
will force it to be preempted, even
though task the higher priority tasks,
they have some lax.
The super duper loop, it's kind of a
nice thing that once it the task C
starts running, it's just going to run
to the end. And yeah, that does delay
the higher priority tasks a little bit,
but at least in this system, we have
that ability.
It's the result of the fact that there's
zero equivalence between these two these
two equations. Um
and and so
this is to me this is cool. This is
really mind-boggling.
Um I I feel like
we build systems with the super loop and
then we move on to RTOSes so we're like,
yeah, that's just
that's little baby work, right? And it's
not, right? There there I think it's
although it's true that there's probably
a lot more task sets that you can
schedule with a preemptive RTOS than
with a super loop. It's not It's not an
overlapping Venn diagram, right? There
are absolutely tasks that's that you can
schedule with a super loop that you
actually can't with an RTOS. Um and and
to me that's key, right? This is
we're not just like trying to claw to
reach the same performance of the RTOS
and failing short. Um in some cases
we're actually the super loop actually
performs better than the preemptive
RTOS.
Okay, so so to wrap up, right? Comparing
these two.
Again, I won't lie. The RTOS does give
you some cool stuff.
Excuse me.
For your higher priority tasks, you will
have the best response time with a
preemptive RTOS, right? And then many of
them give you great OS features like
queues and mutexes and semaphores that
are really important for inter-task
communication that it's just if I want
to hit the easy button, it's nice to do.
My super loop though, the worst-case
response time, the whole reason I've got
a scheduler, it's pretty sinking close.
Um
and further big, right? I have no race
conditions. I I I undercut myself a
little bit if I'm using interrupts, but
I can kind of like I can at least
you know, compartmentalize that
specifically enough to to
uh um to to minimize those race
conditions. And it's small. This is This
is the scheduler you can write yourself
in like a dozen lines of code. You can
make sense. I'm not like like trying to
pour through the source code for ThreadX
to figure out what it's doing. Um it's
small. It's simple. It doesn't require
porting. I think there's a lot to to to
like about this. Um if if I've whetted
your interest, this this talk was based
on a series of blog posts I wrote for
Embedded Related where I go much deeper
into how you might implement this on a
real system and a couple other
schedulers to consider. Um
let me ask you this. We'll we'll we'll
end with this question here. I got I got
one summary slide at the end of it.
What are your thoughts? Are some of us
like, "Nah, man. I'm still going to use
free our toss every day.
Yeah, okay. So
Yeah, okay. So the question was
why don't I act why don't I make sure my
tasks aware of the system load and they
can yield to a different task if they
don't have the resource they need or if
they're running out close to a disk.
Yeah.
Well, also so
when I'm talking about the execution
time for the tasks. Yeah, it's it's the
worst case is very the key part there.
So this is, you know, if I'm if I'm want
to make sure that none of my tasks miss
their deadlines. I have to assume that
every other task is executing the
absolute longest code path where it
still has the resources it needs. But
other than that if a system doesn't have
a resource yielding somehow is
absolutely good design design practice.
The only other thing I'll say about
about techniques like that are
can intuitively seem absolutely viable
and intractable to prove mathematically.
And so there's
there's a lot of research on how to
prove this. To me the whole reason why
we do this is to prove that our system
works. So so there's a lot of techniques
that can seem like they they they they
work and they make sense.
But then you lack the ability to to
actually prove that. But, but I mean,
it's great great idea.
Yeah.
Yeah. Great.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely. In in in the article
series I talk about basically
implementing it's essentially a state
machine, right? Where I'm reaching a
point where I feel like I've I've
executed enough and I want to yield back
to the scheduler. If if if those are at
specific points and they happen
deterministically, then I can
incorporate that and it like exactly you
said that the equation doesn't get any
anywhere difficult. If if I do or don't
take yield paths based on the task's
perceived system load, then it becomes
intractable to figure out whether the
system actually meets its deadline or
not because the tasks will or won't
based on like ephemeral conditions.
Yeah.
Yeah, true true. That's a good point.
>> Uh you said is this the right slide?
Yeah.
Thanks.
Um
that eventually you'd reach a point
where like task A would might shift one,
maybe one more, but then the whole
system like everything is is caught up
at that point and you Uh, you you start
back like on this boundary here.
So,
What?
>> You're about to right now at 15.
>> Oh, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, actually it's great point to
meet you. Yeah. So,
B and C have completed. At this point
here,
uh, C needs to run, but A will get
released.
Yeah, so in that case,
so we're making the assumption here
that, uh, task A has to run every five
whatevers,
and that it's totally fine as long as if
it can run anywhere within those five
whatevers, its deadline is simply the
start of the next period. So, if I if I
had like, um, like a like a sensor loop,
okay? So, like there's a lot of PID
loops where, um, I can't have that much
jitter in my my sensor reads. Like the
the the amount of time between taking
sensor readings to feed my PID loop has
to be consistent, otherwise my sampling
rate goes askew, right? Um, in those
cases we might say, "Okay, I'm sampling
every five whatevers, but it has to be
done within one microsecond of when that
task is released to to keep that jitter
really low." In that case, we would have
like a little blue downward arrow here,
and that would that would change the
analysis a little bit. And it might be
in that case that like this specific
system does not become schedulable, but
you know, in that case I have to sort of
re-evaluate my system a little bit.
>> But if you can
>> Okay.
Yeah, well I would say we
a big part of race conditions are data
races and those those we've we've got a
lot of we've got some good tools for.
Not definitely not all of the race
conditions are data races.
Cuz
Yeah.
Well, and the last thing I'll say about
that are there some great resources that
I
link in the in some of the blog series
where the race conditions that they go
they go beyond simple stuff like this
and up into like application level like
if this task this start the part of this
task runs before the part of this task
and there's not like a tool that can
tell me I'm not meeting my design
criteria, you know.
Okay, last thank you for that. Last one
and then I want to make sure you all get
out of here and get some snack before
the next talk.
Okay.
>> Yes, so so that's the point was another
great use of the RTOS is the ability to
just write what I want my task to do and
then let the scheduler figure out when
it needs that task needs to preempt be
preempted at runtime. I don't have to
sort of manually figure out where I want
my yield points to be. I think it's a
great point.
The only thing I think Miro Samek has
some great stuff about
counterarguments to that. But otherwise
great point. I don't want to take too
much of our time. Appreciate you
bringing it up. Thank you so much for
being here. Everyone enjoy the rest of
the conference. Have a great time. If
you have any questions, I'll stick
around. But otherwise have a great time.